A Brief Introduction to Artificial IntelligenceWhat is AI and how is it going to shape the futureBy Dibbyo Saha, Undergraduate Student, Computer Science,Ryerson University
What is Artificial Intelligence?
Image by Gerd Altmann from Pixabay
Generally speaking, Artificial Intelligence is a computing concept that helps amachinethinkandsolvecomplexproblemsaswehumansdowithourintelligence.For example, we performa task, make mistakes and learn fromour mistakes (Atleast thewiseonesofusdo!).Likewise,anAIorArtificialIntelligenceissupposedtoworkonaproblem, makesomemistakes insolvingtheproblemandlearnfromthe problems in a self-correcting manner as a part of its self-improvement. Or inother words, thinkof this likeplayingagameof chess.Everybadmoveyoumakereduces your chances of winning the game. So, every time you loseagainst yourfriend, you try remembering the moves you made which you shouldn’t have andapplythat knowledgeinyour next gameandsoon. Eventually, youget better andyour precision, or in this case probability of winning or solving a problem
improves by a noteworthy extent. AI is programmed to do something similar tothat!Artificial Intelligence vs Traditional Robotics
Photo by Possessed Photography on Unsplash
When we hear the word “Robot”, an image of a metal box with creepyeyes andspeaking in a mechanical voice pops into our head. I mean that’s what we havebeenwatchingintelevisionfor years, isn’tit?Andtoacertaindegreeweareright.Traditional robotics has been perceived by pop culture as an arena that createshumanlike machines to work for us as saviours and sometimes as super-villainsbringing in a cascade of tyranny into the human world. However, real liferobotsaren’t as humanlikeas wewantthemtobe,yet.Theyareprogrammedinaspecificway to only execute tasks that it has been programmedto perform.
complicated and intuitive sense of thinking and problem-solving abilities of thehuman mind.
A Brief History of AI
Theconcept of Artificial Intelligenceis notasmodernaswethinkitis.Thistracesbacktoas earlyas 1950whenAlanTuringinventedtheTuringtest.Thenthefirstchatbot computerprogram,ELIZA,wascreatedinthe1960s.
[1]
IBMdeepbluewasa chess computer made in 1977 beat a world chess champion in two out of sixgames, one won by the champion and the other threegames were draw.
[2]
In 2011, Siri was announced as a digital assistantby Apple.
[3]
Elon Musk and some others founded OpenAI in 2015.
[4][5]
Artificial Intelligence vs Machine Learning vs DeepLearning
Image by Gerd Altmann from Pixabay
Up until nowin this article we were discussing about Artificial Intelligence as aprocess that isgoingtohelpmachinesachieveahumanlikementalbehaviour.AIisa vast and growing field which also includes a lot more subfields like machinelearninganddeeplearningandsoon.Machinelearningisinanutshelltheconceptof computers learning to improve their predictions and creativity to resemble ahumanlikethinkingprocess usingalgorithms. Machinelearninginvolvesanumberof learning processes such as:
Supervised learning: Supervised learning is a process where our machinesaredesignedtolearnwiththefeedingof labelleddata.Inthisprocessourmachine
is being trained by giving it access to a huge amount of data and training themachine to analyze it. For instance, the machine is given a number of images ofdogs taken frommany different angles with colour variations, breeds and manymore diversity. So that, the machine learns to analyze data from these diverseimages of dogs and the “insight” of machines keep increasing and soon themachinecanpredict ifit’sadogfromawholedifferentpicturewhichwasnotevena part of the labelled data set of dog images themachine was fed earlier.
Unsupervised learning: Contrary to the supervised learning, theunsupervised learning algorithms comprises analyzing unlabelled data i.e., inthiscase we are training the machine to analyze and learn froma series of data, themeaning of which is not apparently comprehendible by the human eyes. Themachine looks for patterns anddraws conclusions onits ownfromthepatterns ofthe data. Important thing to remember that the dataset usedinthis instanceis notlabelled and the conclusions are drawn by the machines.
Reinforcement learning: Reinforcement learning is a feedback dependentmachine learning model. In this process the machine is givenadataandmadetopredict what thedatawas. If themachinegeneratesaninaccurateconclusionabouttheinput data, themachineis givenfeedbackaboutitsincorrectness.Forexample,ifyougivethemachineanimageofabasketballanditidentifiesthebasketballasatennis ball or something else, you give a negative feedback to the machine andeventuallythemachinelearns toidentifyanimageofabasketballonitsownwhenit comes across a completely different picture ofa basketball.
Source:http://datasciencecentral.com
Deep Learning, on the other hand is the concept of computers simulating theprocess ahumanbraintakes toanalyze, thinkandlearn.Thedeeplearningprocessinvolves somethingcalledaneural networkas apartofthethinkingprocessforanAI. It takes anenormous amount of datatotraindeeplearningandaconsiderablypowerful computing device for such computation methods.
AI at Work Today
Photo by Dan Seifert / The Verge
The most common examples of uses of Artificial Intelligencecanbefoundtodayinsmart personal assistants likeApple’s Siri andAmazon’s Alexa. Peopleinteractwith these devices to command themon a daily basis and these devices use thecommands as a part of their dataset to learn from. Another known example ofArtificial Intelligence is the use of algorithms in Netflix. Netflix provides verymuchaccurateandrelevant suggestionsofmovies,tvseriesfromourdatawhichiscreated every time we streamor click onsomethinginNetflix. As thedataset forthese systems grows, their accuracy and precision increase as well. Artificial
Intelligenceis alsoviewedas agreat tool for better cybersecurity.Manybanksareusing AI as a means to identify unauthorized credit cards uses. Fromanalyzingcomplexgeneticdatatoperformthemostdelicatesurgeriesatthehighestprecisionis also being worked on to integrate with AI. We all knowabout companies likeTeslaandAppleworkingtomakeflawlessself-drivingcarswhichisgoingtohavegame changing impacts on the future of transportation.
Concerns about AI
One of the most immediate concerns about Artificial Intelligence is the fear oflosing jobs. Artificial Intelligence enhancing automation is also causing hugejoblosses aroundtheworld. AccordingtoaForbes article, it is predictedthatby2025automation will cause a loss of 85 million jobs.
[6]
Artificial Intelligence and The Future
It is said that AI is thegreatest thinghumankindhas ever workedon. AI is beingused in image and speech recognition and analysis which will be far better thanhuman recognition of image and speech and its applicationstretches wide and far.ThereareresearchandworksbeingconductedusingAIthatisgoingtoplayaveryimportant roleinour futurehealthcare. AI is beingworkedontocureAlzheimer’sdisease and someday even blindness. Someone with dyslexia is being helped toread better with the help of AI. Geneticdatais beinganalyzedbybioinformatics;data science integrated with AI for waybetter dataanalysis inhealthcarethat hasnot been possible for us in the past. Fields like cancer research and other suchdiseases are being impacted greatly by advanced applications of AI. AI can be a
great tool in the future of education. AI can be used to analyze data fromanindividual’s personal andintellectual needs, capabilities, choicesandlimitationstodevelop customized curriculum, strategies and schedules that will be more wellsuited, appeallingandinclusiveof most, if not all,childrenandadults.TheusesofAI are also going to change the way we are going to commute in the future. Inaddition to self-driving cars, work is being done to manufacture “self-flying”planes anddrones that convenientlydeliver your foodfaster andbetter.Oneofthebiggest concerns about AI is that jobs are being replaced due to automation.However, AI might be creating more jobs than it replaces. This will change theway humans work by creating new types of jobs.
Source: https://hackernoon.com/artificial-intelligence-and-big-data-zys3258
AI is still in a fairlypreliminary(but rapidlygrowing) stagetodayandit requiresmore and more training to develop. Trainers, engineers, system designers andsoftware developer jobs in machine learning, data science and many suchrelatedfields are being createdinabundance. Newbusiness andinvestment opportunitiesare also on the rise due to endless AI applications in agriculture, education,transportation, finance, biotechnology, cybersecurity, gaming etc. As newbusinesses are being created so are new jobs. Many existing jobs are becoming
redefined and more specialised which is really important for the new world toprosper and advance.Towards Conclusion…
The growth of Artificial Intelligence in recent times has been exponential. Wecannot evenimaginehowbigandimpactfulAIisgoingtobeinthenearfutureandhowdrasticallyit is goingtochangeandupgradetheworldweliveintoday.Thereare a lot more to learn about AI andits rapidlygrowingapplications inour life. Ibelieve it wouldbewisetoadapt tothis changingworldandacquireskills relatedto Artificial Intelligence and technology. Just like AI learns and develops, weshould too - to make this world a better place.
References:
[1]
https://news.harvard.edu/gazette/story/2012/09/alan-turing-at-100/
[2]
https://www.ibm.com/ibm/history/ibm100/us/en/icons/deepblue/
[3]
https://www.firstpost.com/tech/news-analysis/siri-google-now-and-cortana-how-digital-assistants-predict-what-you-need-3671725.html
[4]
https://openai.com/blog/introducing-openai/
[5]
https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-35082344
[6]
https://www.forbes.com/sites/jackkelly/2020/10/27/us-lost-over-60-million-jobs-now-robots-tech-and-artificial-intelligence-will-take-millions-more/?sh=57d352421a52