Citation: Saiyyad, M.M.; Patil, N.N.
Text Summarization Using Deep
Learning Techniques: A Review. Eng.
Proc. 2023, 59, 194. https://doi.org/
10.3390/engproc2023059194
Academic Editors: Nithesh Naik,
Rajiv Selvam, Pavan Hiremath, Suhas
Kowshik CS and Ritesh
Ramakrishna Bhat
Published: 19 January 2024
Copyright: © 2024 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
Proceeding Paper
T ext Summarization Using Deep Learning T echniques: A Review†
Mohmmadali Muzffarali Saiyyad *
and Nitin N. Patil
† Presented at the International Conference on Recent Advances in Science and Engineering,
Dubai, United Arab Emirates, 4–5 October 2023.
Abstract: The process of text summarization is one of the applications of natural language processing
that presents one of the most challenging obstacles. This is one of the most challenging duties since
it demands an in-depth understanding of the information that is being retrieved from the text; as a
result, it is one of the most time-consuming as well. Traditional methods of paraphrasing a text each
come with their own individual set of restrictions; this is why it is vital to develop new methods in
order to achieve better results in paraphrasing a text. Deep learning has been used, which has resulted
in a paradigm shift in the way natural language processing is carried out. The tremendous progress
that has been made in the fields of sentiment analysis, text translation, and text summarization can
be attributed to the application of methodologies that are based on deep learning. The utilization of
these various approaches, which resulted in the production of these advancements, is a primary cause
of these breakthroughs. We have outlined a variety of deep learning procedures with the goals of
summarizing texts and analyzing details in order to prepare these methods for possible applications
in future research.
Keywords: text summarization; deep learning techniques; neural networks; natural language processing
1. Introduction
Day-to-day increases in information pose a problem for information analysis. There-
fore, finding relevant data becomes costly and time consuming, as does determining which
data are of interest. Text summary is the answer to providing information that is clear
and useful. We explore a number of text summary strategies in this manuscript, as well
as the many approaches those have been tested. Gambhir et al. [1] provided a very detail
discussion on classical text summarization techniques. Extractive summarization is covered
with respect to the approach, techniques, and type of summary. Depending on the char-
acteristics employed, the document number, the method used, and other considerations,
there are many forms of text summary. Table 1 [1] lists of all the relevant factors in detail.
There are extractive and abstractive methods for summarizing text. Under the heading
of abstractive text summarizing, Gupta et al. [ 2] addressed particularly thorough text
summary algorithms. More difficult than extractive text summarization is abstractive text
summarization. Depending on various factors, there are various approaches to implement
abstractive text summarization. The many categories of abstractive text summarizing
approaches are elaborated in Figure 1 [2].
Sr. No. Summaries Depending on Various Criteria’s Parameters
1 One or many input documents Various types of text data documents
2 Some words, new words method of text summarization Outcomes based on semantics
3 Query-focused, generic Purpose
4 Unsupervised, supervised, and semi supervised Data Availability
5 Monolithic, multiple, and cross-lingual Language-Dependent
Eng. Proc.2023, 59, 194. https://doi.org/10.3390/engproc2023059194 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/engproc
Eng. Proc.2023, 59, 194 2 of 6
Eng. Proc. 2023, 59, x FOR PEER REVIEW  2 of  6
Sr. No.  Summaries Depending on Various Criteria’s  Parameters
1  One or many input documents  Various types of text
data documents
2  Some words, new words method of text summarization  Outcomes based on se-
3  Query-focused, generic  Purpose
4  Unsupervised, supervised, and semi supervised  Data Availability
5  Monolithic, multiple, and cross-lingual  Language-Dependent
2. Literature Survey
This part of the manuscript covers a variety of deep-learning-based techniques for
performing text summarization. Some models are used on other languages, such as Ben-
gali, Vietnamese, and Arabic. Vietnamese text summarization using supervised learning
was proposed by Thu et al. [3], and is based on neural networks. The method divides
words into two sets: nouns and other word sets. The process reduces the matrix’s dimen-
sions. Consequently, the feature section may be useful. Three-layer feed-forward neural
networks were employed by Thu [3]. Their own corpus of Vietnamese text has been gen-
erated. Due to the lack of prior work on Vietnamese text summarizing, a baseline tech-
nique was used for comparison analysis. The utilized algorithm is typical for the English
language. Vietnamese text summary does not employ any language-speciﬁc techniques.
An opposition base learning (OBL) approach used to enhance the evolutionary search
with quality enhancement was introduced by Abuobieda et al. [4]. OBL uses an evolution-
ary algorithm (EA) to boost performance. EA saves the intermediate state during compu-
tation. Such states can be used by OBL to understand the search space behavior. The pro-
posed method generates the optimal solution. Performance tuning in the evolutionary al-
gorithm increases the accuracy compared with the random algorithm. They focus only on
the initial population of the DE algorithm. Kabeer et al. [5] oﬀered both traditional and
graph-based techniques to construct summaries for Malayalam documents. The statistical
technique is used to analyze and give weight to a sentence to rank it. The graph-based
technique is used to extract the semantics of the sentence from a set of words. In the ﬁrst
phase of graph generation, extraction of the subject, predicate, and object is carried out.
Graphs are generated on the basis of these three key parameters. Sub-graphs are gener-
ated using these three components to generate the summary. A logistic-regression-based
model was used by Hong et al. [6]; they called it RegSum. In the ﬁrst phase, a regression-
2. Literature Survey
This part of the manuscript covers a variety of deep-learning-based techniques for
performing text summarization. Some models are used on other languages, such as Bengali,
Vietnamese, and Arabic. Vietnamese text summarization using supervised learning was
proposed by Thu et al. [3], and is based on neural networks. The method divides words
into two sets: nouns and other word sets. The process reduces the matrix’s dimensions.
Consequently, the feature section may be useful. Three-layer feed-forward neural networks
were employed by Thu [3]. Their own corpus of Vietnamese text has been generated. Due to
the lack of prior work on Vietnamese text summarizing, a baseline technique was used for
comparison analysis. The utilized algorithm is typical for the English language. Vietnamese
text summary does not employ any language-specific techniques. An opposition base
learning (OBL) approach used to enhance the evolutionary search with quality enhancement
was introduced by Abuobieda et al. [4]. OBL uses an evolutionary algorithm (EA) to boost
performance. EA saves the intermediate state during computation. Such states can be used
by OBL to understand the search space behavior. The proposed method generates the
optimal solution. Performance tuning in the evolutionary algorithm increases the accuracy
compared with the random algorithm. They focus only on the initial population of the DE
algorithm. Kabeer et al. [5] offered both traditional and graph-based techniques to construct
summaries for Malayalam documents. The statistical technique is used to analyze and give
weight to a sentence to rank it. The graph-based technique is used to extract the semantics
of the sentence from a set of words. In the first phase of graph generation, extraction of
the subject, predicate, and object is carried out. Graphs are generated on the basis of these
three key parameters. Sub-graphs are generated using these three components to generate
the summary. A logistic-regression-based model was used by Hong et al. [6]; they called it
RegSum. In the first phase, a regression-based approach is used to identify the keyword.
The weight of a word is determined by taking into account its location, position, type,
and relative rank. The set of words present in the whole human-generated summary is
labelled as gold standard keywords. The determinant point process (DPP) outperforms
entropy model, a Naive Bayes classifier, and a support vector machine. Statistical tools
are employed to enhance the choice of material to be summarized. The dimension of
the text, phrases of key value, text occurrence score throughout the entire document, the
initializers, sentence relative position, and the frequency of less important information
are among the features used to generate an effective summary. Other features include the
similarity of words between sentences and paragraphs. The three parts of the approach
developed by Zhong et al. [8] are concept extraction, summary creation, and reconstruction
validation. The deep learning technique is used to minimize the information loss using the
Eng. Proc.2023, 59, 194 3 of 6
validation technique. Vital information in the paper is also identified using the dynamic
programming approach. The algorithm outperforms many supervised algorithms in terms
of multi-document summary generation. The statistical method to perform the word count
to create the sentence vector was developed by Yao et al. [9]. The sentence vector is input
to the hidden layer to compute a cluster of similar score words. The K-nearest neighbor
method is used to identify similar words, which are used in text summarization. The
proposed technique uses a deep neural network with a three-layer model.
Singh et al. [10] employed deep learning for bilingual (Hindi and English) unsuper-
vised automated text summarization. RBMs, or restricted Boltzmann machines, are used
to increase precision. An RBM possesses two secret layers. The pre-processed input is
transmitted to layer one. Weights that are produced at random are multiplied by the input
at layer one. To add up the input sentences, a bias value that is created at random is em-
ployed. For hidden layer two, an identical process is carried out. Extractive query-oriented
single document summarization was proposed by Yousefi et al. [11], generating feature
space from the term frequency (tf) input using a deep auto encoder (AE). Heena et al. [12]
employed a hybrid model combining a fuzzy logic system and a deep neural network
to summarize text. The model used four features for text summarization: title similarity,
term weight, named entities, and numerical data. Based on the type of data, numerical or
word-based named entities will be assigned. Finally, more weight sentences are extracted
to produce an effective summary. Backpropagation neural networks (BNNs) perform better
than existing models. To choose key phrases for text summarization, Nikhil et al. [13] used
fuzzy logic with a restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM). The sentence position, sentence
length, numerical token, and the frequency of sentences are the characteristics that are em-
ployed. The highest frequency sentence is used to divide each sentence into its component
parts, and then each sentence is given a score.
Sahaba et al.’s configurable fuzzy features and neural sequence-to-sequence model
with attention mechanism for word distribution in vocabulary and context are provided
in [14]. Title, sentence proper size, weight matrix of sentences, proper noun, and alpha
number data are employed as characteristics for fuzzy parts. Using a sequence-to-sequence
approach, abstractive text summarization is accomplished. An LSTM-CNN-based ATS
framework (ATSDL) has been developed by Song et al. [15] that can create new sentences
by investigating semantic phrases, which are more fine-grained pieces than sentences. The
three processes that make up phrase extraction are phrase acquisition, phrase improvement,
and phrase combination. Wordnet is used to combine phrases. The text summarizing
approach is put into practice using the LSTM-CNN model. The sentence similarity strategy
for text summarization was developed by Abujar et al. [ 16]. The suggested approach is
utilized mostly for Bengali and English. Word-to-word, sentence-to-sentence, and order
vectors are utilized in lexical layer analysis to produce sentence similarity scores. The
sequence-to-sequence approach was used by Al-maleh et al. [ 17] to summarize Arabic
literature. On the basis of the original text, an abstractive headline is generated using an
encoder–decoder structure. The context vector is used to identify terms that are not in
dictionaries. A technique for summarising Arabic text that uses a sequence-to-sequence
model was proposed by Wazery et al. [18]. Encoder and decoder are the two parts of this
paradigm that function. The sequence-to-sequence active modelling technique verifies
different criteria’s to see which one performs best.
3. Competitive Analysis
The comparative comparison of several enhanced machine learning methods with neu-
ral models for text summarization of text documents is presented in Table 2 [3–18]. Analysis
of several methods based on the deep learning method employed, benefits, drawbacks,
dataset utilized, and accuracy in terms of ROUGE score. A set of criteria and software
tool called Recall-Oriented Understudy for Gisting Evaluation (ROUGE) Score are used to
assess automated summarization.
Eng. Proc.2023, 59, 194 4 of 6
text document/s.
Ref. No. Technique Used Pros Cons Corpus Used Accuracy
[3]
Three-layer
feed-forward
Used for Vietnamese Text.
No other work on
Vietnamese text
Human-generated
summary is the
comparison and
evaluation required
Manual Corpus is
generated for training
and testing; 16,117
Sentences; 300 documents
For 80% text, it has
0.875 precision
Enhance the DE
evolutionary search
algorithm used for better
text clustering
RNN outperforms the
method with respect to
ROUGE score level 1
DUC 2002 dataset ROUGE-2 score
0.22356
[5]
Statistical method
and semantic
Used for Malayalam text
summarization Syntactic
structure is used for
effective summary
Time complexity is the
key factor while large text
summary generation
Manual Corpus is
generated using 25
documents containing
Malayalam text
ROUGE-L score
precision–
statistical method
0.637 semantic
method 0.466
Effective in word weight
identification using a novel
model to cluster high
weight words
DPP outperforms the
method with respect to
ROUGE2 Score
DUC 2003 Dataset
is utilized.
ROUGE-2
score 9.75
using hybrid approach
CNN outperforms the
method with multi
later model
DUC 2002 used
for analysis.
ROUGE-1
score 0.3862
Query-based
multi-document
summarization is
developed for
English modelling
Ranking SVM
outperforms in ROUGE
1,2 Score
DUC 2005, 2006, and
2007 datasets
ROUGE-SU-4
Score 0.1685
Outperforms random,
LEAD, and LSA algorithms
in terms of ROUGE-L Score
DSDR-nonlinear
Outperform s in
ROUGE-1,2 and L Score
DUC 2006, 2007 Datasets
used for training and
testing purposes
ROUGE-L score
0.31008, 0.36881
[10]
Used for bilingual text
RNN outperforms the
method in
ROUGE-1 Score
Manual Corpus is created
and used for
testing purposes
ROUGE-1
score 0.85233
[11]
Ensemble noisy
Summarization using auto
encode is generated
Time complexity issue
increases with number of
connected layers
SKE, BC3 Datasets used
for training and
testing purpose
ROUGE-2
score 0.5031
Performs 31% better than
individual models of fuzzy
system and ANN
BNN outperform the
methods using improved
ROUGE-1 Score
Manual Corpus is
generated for training
and testing
ROUGE-1,2, L
score for the model
is 0.75
in ROUGE-1
CNN Outperform the
Method in
ROUGE-2 Score
Manual Corpus is
generated for training
and testing
ROUGE-1
score 0.84
sequence-to-sequence
model using
ROUGE-1 score
Feature customization
leads to complex
vocabulary count
CNN, Daily Mail Dataset ROUGE-1
score 0.3619
Improved semantics and
syntactic structure for
word formation
Time complexity issue
with increased layers
CNN, Daily Mail Corpus
is used experiment
ROUGE-2
score 0.178
measuring model
Used for Bengali text
summarization using
vocabulary-focused model
Backtracking methods
outperform in
ROUGE-L Score
Manual Corpus is
generated for training
and testing
Wu and Palmer
measure (WP) 1
[17]
Sequence-to-
sequence model for
deep learning
Used for Arabic text
summarization;
structure-based approach
is used
Transformer outperforms
the method in
ROGUE-2 score
Arabic dataset is
generated for training
and testing
ROUGE-1
score 0.4423
Used for Arabic Text
using syntax
Time complexity issue
Arabic dataset is
generated for training
and testing.
ROUGE-L
Score 0.3437
Eng. Proc.2023, 59, 194 5 of 6
4. Conclusions
In this manuscript, we have explored various deep learning approaches for text sum-
marization, based on experimental results proposed by various researchers. We conclude
that every deep learning method has some pros and cons. Evaluating these methods, we
found that the pre-trained transformer yields the best results for text summarization. In
future work, combinations of traditional methods and pre-trained transformers will be
investigated for better results. With the introduction of deep learning methods, the field
of text summarization has made significant strides forward. However, a vast number of
uncharted territories still need exploration. One of the main focuses is on developing new
architectures that can pick up on the subtle meanings hidden within text. Multi-modal
summarizing, which includes not just text but also images and maybe audio data, has the
potential to significantly improve the summary creation process.
The breadth and variety of the dataset is a major cause for concern. It is possible
that current datasets lack the diversity and size needed to effectively train models to
understand nuanced or domain-specific settings. Therefore, expanding and diversifying
existing datasets, perhaps by tapping into real-world data, is crucial for making progress in
the field.
Incorporating transfer learning and few-shot learning has the ability to improve the
summary quality while also reducing the data demand problem. It is also important to
incorporate human-centric evaluations or to develop new metrics that better capture se-
mantic coherence and informativeness when evaluating the performance of summarization
models beyond traditional measures such as ROUGE.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: I would like to thank my research center, R.C. Patel Institute of Technology, for
facilitating all the research. My research mentor, Nitin N. Patil, deserves special recognition for his
tolerance and encouragement in helping me overcome the many challenges I encountered during
our research.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflicts of interest.
1. Gambhir, M.; Gupta, V . Recent automatic text summarization techniques: A survey. Artif. Intell. Rev.2017, 47, 1–66. [CrossRef]
2. Gupta, S.; Gupta, S.K. Abstractive summarization: An overview of the state of the art. Expert Syst. Appl. 2019, 121, 49–65.
[CrossRef]
3. Thu, H.N.T.; Huu, Q.N.; Ngoc, T.N.T. A supervised learning method combine with dimensionality reduction in Vietnamese text
summarization. In Proceedings of the 2013 Computing, Communications and IT Applications Conference (ComComAp), Hong
Kong, China, 1–4 April 2013; pp. 69–73.
4. Abuobieda, A.; Salim, N.; Kumar, Y.J.; Osman, A.H. Opposition differential evolution based method for text summarization. In
Proceedings of the Asian Conference on Intelligent Information and Database Systems, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 18–20 March
2013; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013; pp. 487–496.
5. Kabeer, R.; Idicula, S.M. Text summarization for Malayalam documents—An experience. In Proceedings of the 2014 International
Conference on Data Science & Engineering (ICDSE), Chicago, IL, USA, 31 March–4 April 2014; pp. 145–150.
6. Hong, K.; Nenkova, A. Improving the estimation of word importance for news multi-document summarization. In Proceedings
of the 14th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Gothenburg, Sweden,
26–30 April 2014; pp. 712–721.
7. Fattah, M.A. A hybrid machine learning model for multi-document summarization. Appl. Intell.2014, 40, 592–600. [CrossRef]
8. Zhong, S.; Liu, Y.; Li, B.; Long, J. Queryoriented unsupervised multi-document summarization via deep learning model. Expert
Syst. Appl.2015, 42, 8146–8155. [CrossRef]
9. Yao, C.; Shen, J.; Chen, G. Automatic document summarization via deep neural networks. In Proceedings of the 2015 8th
International Symposium on Computational Intelligence and Design (ISCID), Hangzhou, China, 12–13 December 2015; Volume 1,
pp. 291–296.
Eng. Proc.2023, 59, 194 6 of 6
10. Singh, S.P .; Kumar, A.; Mangal, A.; Singhal, S. Bilingual automatic text summarization using unsupervised deep learning. In
Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Electrical, Electronics, and Optimization Techniques (ICEEOT), Chennai,
India, 3–5 March 2016; pp. 1195–1200.
11. Yousefi-Azar, M.; Hamey, L. Text summarization using unsupervised deep learning.Expert Syst. Appl.2017, 68, 93–105. [CrossRef]
12. Chopade, H.A.; Narvekar, M. Hybrid auto text summarization using deep neural network and fuzzy logic system. In Proceedings
of the 2017 International Conference on Inventive Computing and Informatics (ICICI), Coimbatore, India, 23–24 November 2017;
pp. 52–56.
13. Shirwandkar, N.S.; Kulkarni, S. Extractive text summarization using deep learning. In Proceedings of the 2018 Fourth International
Conference on Computing Communication Control and Automation (ICCUBEA), Pune, India, 16–18 August 2018; pp. 1–5.
14. Sahba, R.; Ebadi, N.; Jamshidi, M.; Rad, P . Automatic text summarization using customizable fuzzy features and attention on the
context and vocabulary. In Proceedings of the 2018 World Automation Congress (WAC), Stevenson, WA, USA, 3–6 June 2018;
pp. 1–5.
15. Song, S.; Huang, H.; Ruan, T. Abstractive text summarization using LSTM-CNN based deep learning. Multimed. Tools Appl.
2019, 78, 857–875. [CrossRef]
16. Abujar, S.; Hasan, M.; Hossain, S.A. Sentence similarity estimation for text summarization using deep learning. In Proceedings
of the 2nd International Conference on Data Engineering and Communication Technology, Pune, India, 15–16 December 2019;
Springer: Singapore, 2019; pp. 155–164.
17. Al-Maleh, M.; Desouki, S. Arabic text summarization using deep learning approach. J. Big Data2020, 7, 109. [CrossRef]
18. Wazery, Y.M.; Saleh, M.E.; Alharbi, A.; Ali, A.A. Abstractive Arabic Text Summarization Based on Deep Learning.Comput. Intell.
Neurosci. 2022, 2022, 1566890. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to